Networking refinements (#1440)
dotnet/docs-aspire: docs/fundamentals/networking-overview.md

For more information, see [.NET Aspire and launch profiles](launch-profiles.md).

## Kestrel configured endpoints

> .NET Aspire supports Kestrel endpoint configuration. For example, consider a _appsettings.json_ file for a project that defines a Kestrel endpoint with the `https` scheme and port 7001:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET Aspire supports Kestrel endpoint configuration. For example, consider an _appsettings.json_ file for a project that defines a Kestrel endpoint with the HTTPS scheme and port 7001:
```

:::code language="json" source="snippets/networking/Networking.Frontend/Networking.Frontend/appsettings.Development.json" highlight="8-14":::

> The preceding configuration specifies the an `Https` endpoint. The `Url` property is set to `https://*:7001`, which means the endpoint listens on all interfaces on port 7001. For more information, see [Configure endpoints for the ASP.NET Core Kestrel web server](/aspnet/core/fundamentals/servers/kestrel/endpoints).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preceding configuration specifies an `Https` endpoint. The `Url` property is set to `https://*:7001`, which means the endpoint listens on all interfaces on port 7001. For more information, see [Configure endpoints for the ASP.NET Core Kestrel web server](/aspnet/core/fundamentals/servers/kestrel/endpoints).
```

With the Kestrel endpoint configured, the project should remove any configured `applicationUrl` from the _launchSettings.json_ file.

> [!NOTE]
> If the `applicationUrl` is present in the _launchSettings.json_ file and the Kestrel endpoint is configured, the app host will throw an exception.

> When you add a project resource, there's an overload that allows you to specify that the _launchSettings.json_ file should be ignored, and the Kestrel endpoint should be used instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you add a project resource, there's an overload that lets you specify that the Kestrel endpoint should be used instead of the _launchSettings.json_ file:
```

For network communication, the `Protocol` property supports **TCP** and **UDP**, with potential for more in the future, and the `Transport` property indicates the transport protocol (**HTTP**, **HTTP2**, **HTTP3**). Lastly, if the service is URI-addressable, the `UriScheme` property provides the URI scheme for constructing the service URI.

For more information, see the available properties of the [EndpointAnnotation properties](/dotnet/api/aspire.hosting.applicationmodel.endpointannotation#properties).

## Endpoint filtering

All .NET Aspire project resource endpoints follow a set of default heuristics. Some endpoints are included in `ASPNETCORE_URLS` at runtime, some are published as `HTTP/HTTPS_PORTS`, and some configurations are resolved from Kestrel configuration. Regardless of the default behavior, you can filter the endpoints that are included in environment variables by using the <xref:Aspire.Hosting.ProjectResourceBuilderExtensions.WithEndpointsInEnvironment%2A> extension method:

:::code source="snippets/networking/Networking.AppHost/Program.EndpointFilter.cs" id="filter":::

> The preceding code adds a default HTTPS endpoint, as well as an `admin` endpoint on port 19227, however; the `admin` endpoint is excluded from the environment variables. This is useful when you want to expose an endpoint for internal use only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preceding code adds a default HTTPS endpoint, as well as an `admin` endpoint on port 19227. However, the `admin` endpoint is excluded from the environment variables. This is useful when you want to expose an endpoint for internal use only.
```
